Add Core APIs to doc website repo. (#1932)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _data-prepper/core-apis.md

git ---
layout: default
title: Core APIs
nav_order: 2
---

> All Data Prepper instances expose a server with some control APIs. By default, this server runs on port 4900. Some plugins, especially Source plugins may expose other servers. These will be on different ports and their configurations are independent of the core API. For example, to shut down Data Prepper, you can run:

Reviewer: is this missing the H1 page title "Core APIs"

```
curl -X POST http://localhost:4900/shutdown
```

# APIs

> The following APIs are available:

Author: @dlvenable I think this section would benefit from being formatted as a table to make it easier to see the information at a glance, and because it follows a title/definition format.

```
GET /list
POST /list
```

> * lists running pipelines

Reviewer: "Returns a list of running pipelines."

```
POST /shutdown
```

> * starts a graceful shutdown of the Data Prepper

Reviewer: "Starts. . . Prepper."

```
GET /metrics/prometheus
POST /metrics/prometheus
```

> * returns a scrape of the Data Prepper metrics in Prometheus text format. This API is available provided

Reviewer: "Returns. . . "

Reviewer: use a period at end of second sentence

      `metricsRegistries` parameter in data prepper configuration file `data-prepper-config.yaml` has `Prometheus` as one
      of the registry

```
GET /metrics/sys
POST /metrics/sys
```

> * returns JVM metrics in Prometheus text format. This API is available provided `metricsRegistries` parameter in data

Reviewer: use same format from previous comments.

```

To enable SSL on your Data Prepper endpoint, configure your `data-prepper-config.yaml`
with the following:

```yaml
ssl: true
keyStoreFilePath: "/usr/share/data-prepper/keystore.p12"
keyStorePassword: "secret"
privateKeyPassword: "secret"
```

For more information on configuring your Data Prepper server with SSL, see [Server Configuration](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/configuration.md#server-configuration). If you are using a self-signed certificate, you can add the `-k` flag to quickly test out sending curl requests for the core APIs with SSL.

```
curl -k -X POST https://localhost:4900/shutdown
```

## Authentication

The Data Prepper Core APIs support HTTP Basic authentication. You can set the username and password with the following configuration in `data-prepper-config.yaml`:

```yaml
authentication:
  http_basic:
    username: "myuser"
    password: "mys3cr3t"
```

You can disable authentication of core endpoints using the following
configuration. Use this with caution because the shutdown API and
others will be accessible to anybody with network access to
your Data Prepper instance.

```yaml
authentication:
  unauthenticated:
```

> ## Peer Forwarder

Reviewer: add blank line after H2

Peer forwarder can be configured to enable stateful aggregation across multiple Data Prepper nodes. For more information on configuring Peer Forwarder, see [Peer Forwarder Configuration](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/peer_forwarder.md).
It is supported by `service_map_stateful`, `otel_trace_raw` and `aggregate` processors.

> ## Shutdown Timeouts

Reviewer: same. add blank line after H2

> When the DataPrepper `shutdown` API is invoked, the sink and processor `ExecutorService`'s are given time to gracefully shutdown and clear any in-flight data. The default graceful shutdown timeout for these `ExecutorService`'s is 10 seconds. You can configure the timeout with the following optional parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the DataPrepper `shutdown` API is invoked, the sink and processor `ExecutorService` are given time to gracefully shutdown and clear any in-flight data. The default graceful shutdown timeout for the `ExecutorService` processes is 10 seconds. You can configure the timeout with the following optional parameters:
```

---
layout: default
title: Core APIs
nav_order: 2
---

# Core APIs

> All Data Prepper instances expose a server with some control APIs. By default, this server runs on port 4900. Some plugins, especially source plugins may expose other servers. These will be on different ports, and their configurations are independent of the core API. For example, to shut down Data Prepper, you can run the following curl request:

Reviewer 2: 1. Just for readability, suggestion:
"Some plugins, especially source plugins, may expose other servers that run on different ports. Configurations for these plugins are independent of the core API."

2. Is shutting down Data Prepper with a cURL command an example of the statement about "independent configurations" that precedes it? Is "configurations" the right word here? Or is it the way you format calls to the server that are unique to each plugin (including Data Prepper control APIs)? Would something like this be more accurate?
"Some plugins, especially source plugins, may expose other servers that run on different ports. Therefore, the API requests for these plugins and Data Prepper will vary according to the port used for communication. For example, to shut down Data Prepper, you can run the following curl request:"

Author: @oeyh Can you please clarify on the second comment here?

Reviewer 3: > Is shutting down Data Prepper with a cURL command an example of the statement about "independent configurations" that precedes it?

It's not. I believe it's just an example of the statement "Data Prepper expose a server with some control APIs. By default, this server runs on port 4900."

> Is "configurations" the right word here? Or is it the way you format calls to the server that are unique to each plugin (including Data Prepper control APIs)?

The word "configurations" sounds right to me. We use "configurations" to refer to "settings" for the plugins, which may include a port number. Plugins and core API have separate configurations, and specify different ports in their own configurations.

> ```

Reviewer 2: I think you can use a specific code format for cURL: ```curl
```curl
curl -X POST...
```

Author: @cwillum Can you please clarify what you mean? I'm not seeing a specific code format for this.

Reviewer 2: Nothing pressing. I'm talking about the way markdown represents the code block. For example, we often use ...
~~~
```json
json content
```
~~~
...to put code in that format. You can also do it for YAML files:

~~~
```yaml
yaml content
```
~~~

I thought you should be able to do the same for a cURL command. But I can't find a reference. Probably OK to overlook this comment and move on.

curl -X POST http://localhost:4900/shutdown
```

## APIs

The following table lists the available APIs:

| Name | Description |
| --- | --- | 
| ```GET /list```<br>```POST /list``` | Returns a list of running pipelines. |
| ```POST /shutdown``` | Starts a graceful shutdown of Data Prepper. |

> | ```GET /metrics/prometheus```<br>```POST /metrics/prometheus``` | Returns a scrape of Data Prepper metrics in Prometheus text format. This API is available as a  `metricsRegistries` parameter in the Data Prepper configuration file `data-prepper-config.yaml`, and contains `Prometheus` as part of the registry.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| ```GET /metrics/prometheus```<br>```POST /metrics/prometheus``` | Returns a scrape of Data Prepper metrics in Prometheus text format. This API is available as a `metricsRegistries` parameter in the Data Prepper configuration file `data-prepper-config.yaml` and contains `Prometheus` as part of the registry.
```

> | ```GET /metrics/sys```<br>```POST /metrics/sys``` | Returns JVM metrics in Prometheus text format. This API is available as a `metricsRegistries` parameter in the Data Prepper configuration file `data-prepper-config.yaml`, and contains `Prometheus` as part of the registry.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| ```GET /metrics/sys```<br>```POST /metrics/sys``` | Returns JVM metrics in Prometheus text format. This API is available as a `metricsRegistries` parameter in the Data Prepper configuration file `data-prepper-config.yaml` and contains `Prometheus` as part of the registry.
```

## Configuring the server

You can configure your Data Prepper core APIs through the `data-prepper-config.yaml` file. 

### SSL/TLS connection

> Many of the Getting Started guides for this project disable SSL on the endpoint:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Many of the getting started guides for this project disable SSL on the endpoint:
```

```yaml
ssl: false
```

To enable SSL on your Data Prepper endpoint, configure your `data-prepper-config.yaml` file with the following options:

```yaml
ssl: true
keyStoreFilePath: "/usr/share/data-prepper/keystore.p12"
keyStorePassword: "secret"
privateKeyPassword: "secret"
```

> For more information about configuring your Data Prepper server with SSL, see [Server Configuration](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/configuration.md#server-configuration). If you are using a self-signed certificate, you can add the `-k` flag to quickly test sending curl requests for the core APIs with SSL. Use the following curl request to test for core APIs with SSL.

Reviewer 2: Maybe delete "sending". We know the request is doing that.
"... you can add the `-k` flag to the request to quickly test core APIs with SSL."

Is the "shutdown" command (in example) used intentionally to test curl requests? If yes, can you just state explicitly, "Use the `shutdown` request to test core APIs using SSL."?
Or can you use any of the core APIs (## APIs) to test?

Author: @oeyh Can we say, "Use the `shutdown` request to test core APIs using SSL."?

Reviewer 3: Sure.

```
curl -k -X POST https://localhost:4900/shutdown
```

### Authentication

The Data Prepper core APIs support HTTP basic authentication. You can set the username and password with the following configuration in the `data-prepper-config.yaml` file:

```yaml
authentication:
  http_basic:
    username: "myuser"
    password: "mys3cr3t"
```

You can disable authentication of core endpoints using the following configuration. Use this with caution because the shutdown API and others will be accessible to anybody with network access to your Data Prepper instance.

```yaml
authentication:
  unauthenticated:
```

### Peer Forwarder

Peer Forwarder can be configured to enable stateful aggregation across multiple Data Prepper nodes. For more information about configuring Peer Forwarder, see [Peer Forwarder Configuration](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/peer_forwarder.md). It is supported by the `service_map_stateful`, `otel_trace_raw`, and `aggregate` processors.

### Shutdown timeouts

> When the Data Prepper `shutdown` API is invoked, the `ExecutorService` sink and processor are given time to gracefully shut down and clear any in-flight data. The default graceful shutdown timeout for the `ExecutorService` process is 10 seconds. You can configure the timeout with the following optional YAML file parameters:

Reviewer 2: "You can configure the timeout with the following optional YAML file parameters:"
Just to be sure, this configuration is done in the `data-prepper-config.yaml` file. Yes?

Author: @oeyh Can you confirm that the YAML file referred to here is the `data-prepper-config.yaml`file?

Reviewer 3: Yes, it is.

> When you run the Data Prepper `shutdown` API, the process gracefully shuts down and clears any remaining data for both the `ExecutorService` sink and `ExecutorService` processor. The default timeout for shutdown of both processes is 10 seconds. You can configure the timeout with the following optional `data-prepper-config.yaml` file parameters:

Reviewer 4: Confirm that "for both" shouldn't be "from both".

Author: @dlvenable Can you confirm that we should use "for both" here?

```yaml
processorShutdownTimeout: "PT15M"
sinkShutdownTimeout: 30s
```

> The values for these parameters are parsed into a `Duration` object via the [Data Prepper Duration Deserializer](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/tree/main/data-prepper-core/src/main/java/org/opensearch/dataprepper/parser/DataPrepperDurationDeserializer.java).

Author: ```suggestion
The values for these parameters are parsed into a `Duration` object via the [Data Prepper Duration Deserializer](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/tree/main/data-prepper-core/src/main/java/org/opensearch/dataprepper/parser/DataPrepperDurationDeserializer.java). 
```

Test comment.

> The values for these parameters are parsed into a `Duration` object via the [Data Prepper Duration Deserializer](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/tree/main/data-prepper-core/src/main/java/org/opensearch/dataprepper/parser/DataPrepperDurationDeserializer.java). 

Reviewer 4: Change "via" to either "through" or "by" (avoid Latinisms).

---
layout: default
title: Core APIs
nav_order: 2
---

# Core APIs

> All Data Prepper instances expose a server with some control APIs. By default, this server runs on port 4900. Some plugins, especially Source plugins may expose other servers. These will be on different ports and their configurations are independent of the core API. For example, to shut down Data Prepper, you can run:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All Data Prepper instances expose a server with some control APIs. By default, this server runs on port 4900. Some plugins, especially Source plugins, may expose other servers. These will be on different ports, and their configurations are independent of the core API. For example, to shut down Data Prepper, you can run:
```

Reviewer 4: Confirm the capitalization of "Source". Expand the last sentence to read "...you can run the following [noun]:"

```
curl -X POST http://localhost:4900/shutdown
```

## APIs

> The following APIs are available:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following table lists the available APIs.
```

Author: @natebower Is there a reason we aren't supposed to use a colon after APIs here?

Reviewer 4: @carolxob When text introduces a table or image, it should be a complete sentence and end with a period, not a colon.

| Name | Description |
| --- | --- | 
| ```GET /list```<br>```POST /list``` | Returns a list of running pipelines. |
| ```POST /shutdown``` | Starts a graceful shutdown of Data Prepper. |

> | ```GET /metrics/prometheus```<br>```POST /metrics/prometheus``` | Returns a scrape of Data Prepper metrics in Prometheus text format. This API is available provided `metricsRegistries` parameter in data prepper configuration file `data-prepper-config.yaml` has `Prometheus` as one of the registry.

Reviewer 4: The last sentence of this description needs revision for clarity, grammar, and capitalization.

Author: @natebower Adjusted wording, but may need to be adjusted again.

Reviewer 4: Made a few edits, but otherwise good.

> | ```GET /metrics/sys```<br>```POST /metrics/sys``` | Returns JVM metrics in Prometheus text format. This API is available provided `metricsRegistries` parameter in Data Prepper configuration file `data-prepper-config.yaml` has `Prometheus` as one of the registry.

Reviewer 4: Same

## Configuring the server

You can configure your Data Prepper core APIs through the `data-prepper-config.yaml` file. 

### SSL/TLS connection

> Many of the Getting Started guides in this project disable SSL on the endpoint.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Many of the Getting Started guides for this project disable SSL on the endpoint:
```

```yaml
ssl: false
```

> To enable SSL on your Data Prepper endpoint, configure your `data-prepper-config.yaml`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To enable SSL on your Data Prepper endpoint, configure your `data-prepper-config.yaml` file
```

> with the following:

Reviewer 4: Add the noun to the end of the sentence. "...with the following [noun]:"

```yaml
ssl: true
keyStoreFilePath: "/usr/share/data-prepper/keystore.p12"
keyStorePassword: "secret"
privateKeyPassword: "secret"
```

> For more information on configuring your Data Prepper server with SSL, see [Server Configuration](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/configuration.md#server-configuration). If you are using a self-signed certificate, you can add the `-k` flag to quickly test out sending curl requests for the core APIs with SSL.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For more information about configuring your Data Prepper server with SSL, see [Server Configuration](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/configuration.md#server-configuration). If you are using a self-signed certificate, you can add the `-k` flag to quickly test sending curl requests for the core APIs with SSL.
```

Reviewer 4: Use "For information about" or "For more information about." Don't use "For information on." Where possible, try not to use phrasal verbs like "test out," as they may not be understood by Global English speakers.

> ```

Reviewer 4: This element needs to be introduced in the preceding text.

curl -k -X POST https://localhost:4900/shutdown
```

### Authentication

> The Data Prepper Core APIs support HTTP Basic authentication. You can set the username and password with the following configuration in `data-prepper-config.yaml`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Data Prepper Core APIs support HTTP basic authentication. You can set the username and password with the following configuration in the `data-prepper-config.yaml` file:
```

Reviewer 4: "Core" is lowercase in a previous instance. Please confirm and apply globally.

```yaml
authentication:
  http_basic:
    username: "myuser"
    password: "mys3cr3t"
```

You can disable authentication of core endpoints using the following
configuration. Use this with caution because the shutdown API and
others will be accessible to anybody with network access to
your Data Prepper instance.

```yaml
authentication:
  unauthenticated:
```

### Peer Forwarder

> Peer forwarder can be configured to enable stateful aggregation across multiple Data Prepper nodes. For more information on configuring Peer Forwarder, see [Peer Forwarder Configuration](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/peer_forwarder.md).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Peer Forwarder can be configured to enable stateful aggregation across multiple Data Prepper nodes. For more information about configuring Peer Forwarder, see [Peer Forwarder Configuration](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/peer_forwarder.md).
```

> It is supported by `service_map_stateful`, `otel_trace_raw` and `aggregate` processors.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It is supported by the `service_map_stateful`, `otel_trace_raw`, and `aggregate` processors.
```

### Shutdown timeouts

> When the DataPrepper `shutdown` API is invoked, the sink and processor `ExecutorService` are given time to gracefully shutdown and clear any in-flight data. The default graceful shutdown timeout for the `ExecutorService` processes is 10 seconds. You can configure the timeout with the following optional parameters:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When the Data Prepper `shutdown` API is invoked, the sink and processor `ExecutorService` are given time to gracefully shut down and clear any in-flight data. The default graceful shutdown timeout for the `ExecutorService` processes is 10 seconds. You can configure the timeout with the following optional parameters:
```

Reviewer 4: In the first sentence, the s/v agreement sounds a bit strange. Can we revise for simplicity/clarity? The second sentence could also probably flow a bit better.

Author: @cwillum Any thoughts on how this can be improved/clarified?

Reviewer 2: This might not have a sharp point to it, but something like this possibly? ...

"When you run the Data Prepper `shutdown` API, the process gracefully shuts down and clears any in-flight data for both the `ExecutorService` sink and `ExecutorService` processor. The default timeout for shutdown of both processes is 10 seconds."
